One more feature of XML Schema is that elements can be made nillable.
JAXB also supports this XML schema feature,
so let's see how to use it, and again,
let's also see what this means for marshalling and unmarshalling.
There are different ways in which an XML element can have no value.
The element can just be absent from the XML,
or the element can be present, but not have a value.
It's also possible to explicitly indicate that the value of an element is nil.
Such an element would look like this in XML.
It would have a special attribute named nil from
the XMLSchema-instance namespace, which is part of the XML Schema standard.
Let's see how JAXB supports this.
The example to look at for this is ps-jaxb-17-nillable.
Take a look at class Item.
In the XmlElement annotation on the comment field,
I've specified that this field is nillable.
In the generated schema,
I can see that the element declaration now has nillable=true.
Let's take a look at what effect this has on marshalling.
In the marshalling example, two items are added to the PurchaseOrder.
The first one has a comment, and the second one doesn't.
Before I run this,
remember what normally happens when a field is null during marshalling.
JAXB will then leave the field out of the XML entirely,
so the second item element would not have a comment element at all.
Let's now run the example and see what happens.
We see that the second item element now does have a comment element,
which is set to nil with the special XMLSchema-instance attribute.
So making a field nillable does change the marshalling behavior.
For unmarshalling, there are no surprises,
but it's worth it to pay attention to what happens exactly.
I especially want to show you what the difference is between
an element being set to nil and not having the element in the
XML at all during unmarshalling.
The difference is that when an element is set to nil explicitly,
the corresponding field will be set to null during unmarshalling.
And when the element is missing,
the field will not be touched during unmarshalling.
You can see this difference by initializing the field in class
Item with a Test value and then running the unmarshalling
example with the two different inputs.
When the element is present in XML but set to nil,
you'll see that the field will have been set to null during unmarshalling,
and when the element is missing, you'll see that the field still has the default value after unmarshalling.